examples/official-site/your-first-sql-website/tutorial.md, before:

# Building your website locally

Create a folder on your computer where you will store all contents related to your sql website.
In the rest of this tutorial, we will call this folder the **root folder** of your website.

Open the file you downloaded above, and place `sqlpage.bin` (if you are on linux or Mac OS)
or `sqlpage.exe` at the root of the folder.

Then launch the `sqlpage.bin` executable file you just downloaded in a terminal from this folder.

![screenshot for the sql website setup](first-sql-website-launch.png)

You should see a message in your terminal that includes the sentence `accessible from the network, and locally on http://localhost:8080`

You can open your website locally by visiting [`http://localhost:8080`](http://localhost:8080)

# Your website’s first SQL file

In the root folder of your SQLPage website, create a new SQL file called `index.sql`.
Open it in a text editor that supports SQL syntax highlighting (I recommend [VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com/)).

The `index.sql` file will be executed every time a visitor opens your website's home page.
You can use it to retrieve data from your database and define how it should be displayed to your visitors.

As an example, let's start with a simple `index.sql` that displays a list of popular websites:

```sql
SELECT 'list' AS component, 'Popular websites' AS title;

SELECT 'Hello' AS title, 'world' AS description, 'https://wikipedia.org' AS link;
```

The first line of the file defines the component that will be used to display the data, and properties of that component.
In this case, we use the [`list` component](/documentation.sql?component=list#component) to display a list of items.
The second line defines the data that will populate the component.
All the components you can use and their properties are documented in [SQLPage's online documentation](https://sql.datapage.app/documentation.sql).

# Your database schema

> If you already have a database populated with data,
> or if you intend to use other tools to manage your database structure,
> you can skip this section.

The [database schema](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_schema) for your SQLPage website
can be defined using SQL scripts located in the
**`sqlpage/migrations`** subdirectory of your website's root folder.

For our first website, let's create a file located in `sqlpage/migrations/0001_create_users_table.sql` with the following contents:

```sql
CREATE TABLE users (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
    name TEXT NOT NULL
);
```

If you need to quickly test a database schema and associated queries online,
before making any change to your database, I can recommend [sqliteonline.com](https://sqliteonline.com/) (which actually also works with Postgres, MySQL, and SQL Server).

Please read our [**introduction to database migrations**](./migrations.sql) to
learn how to maintain your database schema in the long term.

> **Note**: The migration system is not supported on Microsoft SQL Server databases.
> If you are using a SQL Server database, you should create your tables using a different tool, such as _SQL Server Management Studio_.

# Connect to a custom database

By default, SQLPage uses a [SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org/about.html) database stored in a file named `sqlpage.db`
in the `sqlpage` configuration folder.
You can change this by creating a file named `sqlpage.json` in a folder called `sqlpage`.
So, if your website's root folder is `/my_website`, you should create a file at `/my_website/sqlpage/sqlpage.json`.

Here is an example `sqlpage.json` file:

```sql
{ "database_url": "sqlite://:memory:" }
```

This will tell SQLPage to use an in-memory SQLite database instead of the default file-based database. While this means all changes to the database will be lost when you stop the SQLPage server, it's useful for quickly testing and iterating on your database schema.
If you then deploy your website online using a service like [DataPage.app](https://datapage.app), it will automatically use a persisted database instead.

Later, when you want to deploy your website online, you can switch back to a persistent database like

- a SQLite file with `sqlite://your-database-file.db` ([see options](https://docs.rs/sqlx/0.6.3/sqlx/sqlite/struct.SqliteConnectOptions.html#main-content)),
- a PostgreSQL-compatible server with `postgres://user:password@host/database` ([see options](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/15/libpq-connect.html#id-1.7.3.8.3.6)),
- a MySQL-compatible server with `mysql://user:password@host/database` ([see options](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/connecting-using-uri-or-key-value-pairs.html)),
- a Microsoft SQL Server with `mssql://user:password@host/database` ([see options](https://docs.rs/sqlx-oldapi/latest/sqlx_oldapi/mssql/struct.MssqlConnectOptions.html), [note about named instances](https://github.com/lovasoa/SQLpage/issues/92)),

If `user` or `password` contains special characters, you should [percent-encode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Percent-encoding) them.
For instance, a SQL Server database named `db` running on `localhost` port `1433` with the username `funny:user` and the password `p@ssw0rd` would be represented as `mssql://funny%3Auser:p%40ssw0rd@localhost:1433/db`.
For more information about the properties that can be set in sqlpage.json, see [SQLPage's configuration documentation](https://github.com/lovasoa/SQLpage/blob/main/configuration.md#configuring-sqlpage)

![screenshot for the full sql website folder organisation](full-website.png)

# Use parameterized SQL queries to let users interact with your database

### Displaying a form

Let’s create a form to let our users insert data into our database. Add the following code to your `index.sql` file:

```sql
SELECT 'form' AS component, 'Add a user' AS title;
SELECT 'Username' as name, TRUE as required;
```

The snippet above uses the [`form` component](https://sql.datapage.app/documentation.sql?component=form#component) to display a form on your website.

### Handling form submission

Nothing happens when you submit the form at the moment. Let’s fix that.
Add the following below the previous code:

```sql
INSERT INTO users (name)
SELECT :Username
WHERE :Username IS NOT NULL;
```

The snippet above uses an [`INSERT INTO SELECT` SQL statement](https://www.sqlite.org/lang_insert.html) to
[safely](../safety.sql) insert a new row into the `users` table when the form is submitted.
It uses a `WHERE` clause to make sure that the `INSERT` statement is only executed when the `:Username` parameter is present.
The `:Username` parameter is set to `NULL` when you initially load the page, and then SQLPage automatically sets it to the value
from the text field when the user submits the form.

#### Parameters

There are two types of parameters you can use in your SQL queries:

- **URL parameters** like **`$ParameterName`**. If you add `?x=1&y=2` to the end of the URL of your page, `$x` will be set to the string `'1'` and `$y` will be set to the string `'2'`. This is useful to create links with parameters. For instance, if you have a database of products, you can create a link to a product page with the URL `product.sql?product_id=12`. Then, in the `product.sql` file, you can use the `$product_id` variable to get the product with the corresponding ID from your database. URL parameters are also sometimes called *query parameters*, or *GET parameters*.
- **Form parameters** like **`:ParameterName`**. They refer to the value of the field with the corresponding `name` entered by the user in a [form](/component.sql?component=form). If no form was submitted, it is set to `NULL`. Form parameters are also sometimes called *POST parameters*.

> Note: Currently, if a `$parameter` is not present in the URL, it is first looked for in the form parameters. If it is not found there either, it is set to `NULL`. Please do not rely on this behavior, as it may change in the future.

You can also set parameters yourself at any point in your SQL files in order to reuse
their value in several places, using the `SET ParameterName = value` syntax.
For instance, we could use the following code to save the username in uppercase:

```sql
SET Username = UPPER(:Username);
INSERT INTO users (name) VALUES ($Username);
```

### Displaying data from our database

Now, users are present in our database, but we can’t see them.
Let’s see how to use data from our database to populate a [list](/component.sql?component=list) component, in order to display the list of users.

Add the following code to your `index.sql` file:

```sql
SELECT 'list' AS component, 'Users' AS title;
SELECT name AS title,  CONCAT(name, ' is a user on this website.') as description FROM users;
```

### Your first SQLPage website is ready!

You can view [the full source code for this example on Github](https://github.com/lovasoa/SQLpage/tree/main/examples/simple-website-example)

Here is a screenshot of the final result:

![final result](final-result.png)

To go further, have a look at [the examples section of our Github repository](https://github.com/lovasoa/SQLpage/tree/main/examples).


# Deploy your SQLPage website online

### Using DataPage.app
To deploy your SQLPage website online, the easiest way is to use [DataPage.app](https://datapage.app),
a managed hosting service for SQLPage websites maintained by the same people who develop SQLPage.
Just create an account, and follow the instructions to upload your website to our servers. It will be live in seconds!

### Manually
If you prefer to host your website yourself, you can use a cloud provider or a VPS provider. You will need to:
- Configure domain name resolution to point to your server
- Open the port you are using (8080 by default) in your server's firewall
- [Setup docker](https://github.com/lovasoa/SQLpage?tab=readme-ov-file#with-docker) or another process manager such as [systemd](https://github.com/lovasoa/SQLpage/blob/main/sqlpage.service) to start SQLPage automatically when your server boots and to keep it running
- Optionally, [setup a reverse proxy](nginx.sql) to avoid exposing SQLPage directly to the internet
- Optionally, setup a TLS certificate to enable HTTPS
- Configure connection to a cloud database or a database running on your server in [`sqlpage.json`](https://github.com/lovasoa/SQLpage/blob/main/configuration.md#configuring-sqlpage)

# Go further

- Check out [learnsqlpage.com](https://learnsqlpage.com) by Nick Antonaccio for an in-depth tutorial with many examples
- Read the [SQLPage documentation](/documentation.sql) to learn about all the components available in SQLPage
- Join the [SQLPage community](https://github.com/lovasoa/SQLpage/discussions) to ask questions and share your projects
- If you like videos better, check this series that shows how to build and deploy your app from scratch [SQLPage on Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLTue_qIAHxAf9fEjBY2CN0N_5XOiffOk_)

Commit message:

improve installation instructions for macos
fixes https://github.com/sqlpage/SQLPage/discussions/707

examples/official-site/your-first-sql-website/tutorial.md, after:

# Building your website locally

Create a folder on your computer where you will store all contents related to your sql website.
In the rest of this tutorial, we will call this folder the **root folder** of your website.

- On **Windows**, place the `sqlpage.exe` you downloaded above at the root of the folder. Then double-click the `sqlpage.exe` file to start the server.
- On **Linux**, place `sqlpage.bin` at the root of the folder. Then open a terminal, cd to the root folder of your website, and run `./sqlpage.bin` to start the server.
- On **Mac OS**, if you installed SQLPage using Homebrew, then you do not need to place anything at the root of the folder. Open Terminal, cd to the root folder of your website, and type `sqlpage` to start the server.

![screenshot for the sql website setup on linux](first-sql-website-launch.png)

You should see a message in your terminal that includes the sentence `accessible from the network, and locally on http://localhost:8080`

You can open your website locally by visiting [`http://localhost:8080`](http://localhost:8080)

SQLPage should have automatically created a folder called `sqlpage` with a SQLite database file named `sqlpage.db`. This is your website's default database - don't worry, we'll learn how to connect to other databases like PostgreSQL, MySQL, or SQL Server later!

# Your website’s first SQL file

In the root folder of your SQLPage website, create a new SQL file called `index.sql`.
Open it in a text editor that supports SQL syntax highlighting (I recommend [VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com/)).

The `index.sql` file will be executed every time a visitor opens your website's home page.
You can use it to retrieve data from your database and define how it should be displayed to your visitors.

As an example, let's start with a simple `index.sql` that displays a list of popular websites:

```sql
SELECT 'list' AS component, 'Popular websites' AS title;

SELECT 'Hello' AS title, 'world' AS description, 'https://wikipedia.org' AS link;
```

The first line of the file defines the component that will be used to display the data, and properties of that component.
In this case, we use the [`list` component](/documentation.sql?component=list#component) to display a list of items.
The second line defines the data that will populate the component.
All the components you can use and their properties are documented in [SQLPage's online documentation](https://sql.datapage.app/documentation.sql).

# Your database schema

> If you already have a database populated with data,
> or if you intend to use other tools to manage your database structure,
> you can skip this section.

The [database schema](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_schema) for your SQLPage website
can be defined using SQL scripts located in the
**`sqlpage/migrations`** subdirectory of your website's root folder.

For our first website, let's create a file located in `sqlpage/migrations/0001_create_users_table.sql` with the following contents:

```sql
CREATE TABLE users (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
    name TEXT NOT NULL
);
```

If you need to quickly test a database schema and associated queries online,
before making any change to your database, I can recommend [sqliteonline.com](https://sqliteonline.com/) (which actually also works with Postgres, MySQL, and SQL Server).

Please read our [**introduction to database migrations**](./migrations.sql) to
learn how to maintain your database schema in the long term.

> **Note**: The migration system is not supported on Microsoft SQL Server databases.
> If you are using a SQL Server database, you should create your tables using a different tool, such as _SQL Server Management Studio_.

# Connect to a custom database

By default, SQLPage uses a [SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org/about.html) database stored in a file named `sqlpage.db`
in the `sqlpage` configuration folder.
You can change this by creating a file named `sqlpage.json` in a folder called `sqlpage`.
So, if your website's root folder is `/my_website`, you should create a file at `/my_website/sqlpage/sqlpage.json`.

Here is an example `sqlpage.json` file:

```sql
{ "database_url": "sqlite://:memory:" }
```

This will tell SQLPage to use an in-memory SQLite database instead of the default file-based database. While this means all changes to the database will be lost when you stop the SQLPage server, it's useful for quickly testing and iterating on your database schema.
If you then deploy your website online using a service like [DataPage.app](https://datapage.app), it will automatically use a persisted database instead.

Later, when you want to deploy your website online, you can switch back to a persistent database like

- a SQLite file with `sqlite://your-database-file.db` ([see options](https://docs.rs/sqlx-oldapi/latest/sqlx_oldapi/sqlite/struct.SqliteConnectOptions.html)),
- a PostgreSQL-compatible server with `postgres://user:password@host/database` ([see options](https://docs.rs/sqlx-oldapi/latest/sqlx_oldapi/postgres/struct.PgConnectOptions.html)),
- a MySQL-compatible server with `mysql://user:password@host/database` ([see options](https://docs.rs/sqlx-oldapi/latest/sqlx_oldapi/mysql/struct.MySqlConnectOptions.html)),
- a Microsoft SQL Server with `mssql://user:password@host/database` ([see options](https://docs.rs/sqlx-oldapi/latest/sqlx_oldapi/mssql/struct.MssqlConnectOptions.html#method.from_str), [note about named instances](https://github.com/lovasoa/SQLpage/issues/92)),

> If `user` or `password` **contains special characters**, you should [**percent-encode**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Percent-encoding) them.
>
> For instance, a SQL Server database named `db` running on `localhost` port `1433` with the username `funny:user` and the password `p@ssw0rd` would be represented as 
> `mssql://funny%3Auser:p%40ssw0rd@localhost:1433/db`.

For more information about the properties that can be set in sqlpage.json, see [SQLPage's configuration documentation](https://github.com/lovasoa/SQLpage/blob/main/configuration.md#configuring-sqlpage)

![screenshot for the full sql website folder organisation](full-website.png)

# Use parameterized SQL queries to let users interact with your database

### Displaying a form

Let’s create a form to let our users insert data into our database. Add the following code to your `index.sql` file:

```sql
SELECT 'form' AS component, 'Add a user' AS title;
SELECT 'Username' as name, TRUE as required;
```

The first SELECT statement opens the [`form` component](https://sql.datapage.app/component.sql?component=form).
The second SELECT statement adds a field to the form. Since we do not specify a `type`, it will be a text field. The label displayed above the field will be the same as its name by default.

### Handling form submission

Nothing happens when you submit the form at the moment. Let’s fix that.
Add the following below the previous code:

```sql
INSERT INTO users (name)
SELECT :Username
WHERE :Username IS NOT NULL;
```

The snippet above uses an [`INSERT INTO SELECT` SQL statement](https://www.sqlite.org/lang_insert.html) to
[safely](../safety.sql) insert a new row into the `users` table when the form is submitted.
It uses a `WHERE` clause to make sure that the `INSERT` statement is only executed when the `:Username` parameter is present.
The `:Username` parameter is set to `NULL` when you initially load the page, and then SQLPage automatically sets it to the value
from the text field when the user submits the form.

#### Parameters

There are two types of parameters you can use in your SQL queries:

- **URL parameters** like **`$ParameterName`**. If you add `?x=1&y=2` to the end of the URL of your page, `$x` will be set to the string `'1'` and `$y` will be set to the string `'2'`. This is useful to create links with parameters. For instance, if you have a database of products, you can create a link to a product page with the URL `product.sql?product_id=12`. Then, in the `product.sql` file, you can use the `$product_id` variable to get the product with the corresponding ID from your database. URL parameters are also sometimes called *query parameters*, or *GET parameters*.
- **Form parameters** like **`:ParameterName`**. They refer to the value of the field with the corresponding `name` entered by the user in a [form](/component.sql?component=form). If no form was submitted, it is set to `NULL`. Form parameters are also sometimes called *POST parameters*.

> Note: Currently, if a `$parameter` is not present in the URL, it is first looked for in the form parameters. If it is not found there either, it is set to `NULL`. Please do not rely on this behavior, as it may change in the future.

You can also set parameters yourself at any point in your SQL files in order to reuse
their value in several places, using the `SET ParameterName = value` syntax.
For instance, we could use the following code to save the username in uppercase:

```sql
SET Username = UPPER(:Username);
INSERT INTO users (name) VALUES ($Username);
```

### Displaying data from our database

Now, users are present in our database, but we can’t see them.
Let’s see how to use data from our database to populate a [list](/component.sql?component=list) component, in order to display the list of users.

Add the following code to your `index.sql` file:

```sql
SELECT 'list' AS component, 'Users' AS title;
SELECT name AS title,  CONCAT(name, ' is a user on this website.') as description FROM users;
```

### Your first SQLPage website is ready!

You can view [the full source code for this example on Github](https://github.com/lovasoa/SQLpage/tree/main/examples/simple-website-example)

Here is a screenshot of the final result:

![final result](final-result.png)

To go further, have a look at [the examples](../examples/).


# Deploy your SQLPage website online

### Using DataPage.app
To deploy your SQLPage website online, the easiest way is to use [DataPage.app](https://datapage.app),
a managed hosting service for SQLPage websites maintained by the same people who develop SQLPage.
Just create an account, and follow the instructions to upload your website to our servers. It will be live in seconds!

### Manually
If you prefer to host your website yourself, you can use a cloud provider or a VPS provider. You will need to:
- Configure domain name resolution to point to your server
- Open the port you are using (8080 by default) in your server's firewall
- [Setup docker](https://github.com/lovasoa/SQLpage?tab=readme-ov-file#with-docker) or another process manager such as [systemd](https://github.com/lovasoa/SQLpage/blob/main/sqlpage.service) to start SQLPage automatically when your server boots and to keep it running
- Optionally, [setup a reverse proxy](nginx.sql) to avoid exposing SQLPage directly to the internet
- Optionally, setup a TLS certificate to enable HTTPS
- Configure connection to a cloud database or a database running on your server in [`sqlpage.json`](https://github.com/lovasoa/SQLpage/blob/main/configuration.md#configuring-sqlpage)

# Go further

- Check out [learnsqlpage.com](https://learnsqlpage.com) by Nick Antonaccio for an in-depth tutorial with many examples
- Read the [SQLPage documentation](/documentation.sql) to learn about all the components available in SQLPage
- Join the [SQLPage community](https://github.com/lovasoa/SQLpage/discussions) to ask questions and share your projects
- If you like videos better, check this series that shows how to build and deploy your app from scratch [SQLPage on Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLTue_qIAHxAf9fEjBY2CN0N_5XOiffOk_)
